ALEX GREY: Various works of
art have been known to depress
the autoimmune system.
They made a scientific study
of finding out the strength
of the immune system
before going into
see "The Exorcist,"
for example, and then
after a person came out.
And just like any kind
of depressing situation
can sometimes lower our immune
response, certain works of art
can do that as well.
And so if there are
works of art that
can depress our
autoimmune function,
I would think that
there are also
artworks that can
bolster or strengthen
our autoimmune function.
And here, we get
into the idea of art
as a kind of healing force.
And so my idea is that
some of these energetically
charged works of art that
show the light working
through the body and
that the light is keyed
with some sacred
understanding of life
and a connection with
spirit, and that these
elicit a positive
and somewhat healing
response in the unconscious
that people look at the imagery
and access the
dimension of reality
that the work was inspired by.
Because they're most
always depictions
of mystical experiences,
or vision states
that occurred to
me, and that then
I'm trying to portray in the
most direct way possible.
And so if they do their
job, most of the time,
I'm trying to bring the viewer
toward a fuller, richer,
deeper, higher moment, peak
experience, mystical experience
of reality that reinforces
the reason for living--
that life is worth living.
Why?
We can love each other.
We can help each other.
We can see the fabric of
reality as the expression of God
that it is.
We can see deeply into
the catastrophe of life,
as some call it, and see
the hand of spirit working.
And if you provide
little oases of meaning
and sacred understanding
for people,
it's a way to strengthen and
encourage the development
and evolution of consciousness
within that person,
the viewer who's seeing
the works of art.
And so in a way, in the same
way that I've appreciated
the sacred art of
previous cultures
and the kinds of access
to higher reality
that they provide--
this kind of portals
into the mystic reality and the
great and boundless, beautiful,
compassionate sensibilities
that are expressed
through this
religious literature
and through the religious art.
For a contemporary
sensibility that's
outside of the denominations
and looking for a more
universal kind of
spiritual meaning,
I'd like to make
works that resonate
with that kind of sensibility.
And that's why I put the
light around the bodies--
as to reinforce the
light around all of us.
Many artists would
deny or look askance
at the idea that's what they're
doing is a sacred activity.
They'd find it laughable
or silly, you know?
They're making art.
This is-- they're
showing it in a gallery.
They're not showing it in
a religious institution
or cultural center like that.
And some people
are even offended
at the idea of "the spiritual."
And in art in New
York, in many ways,
this is like the
spiritual trenches,
here-- in the spiritual
war or battlefield
that's going on for the
consciousness of humanity.
So you have the deeply
cynical non0believing folks.
Mostly they're sensible
and rational people
who have just never had
a mystical experience.
And they are speaking the truth.
They think it's
a lot of hogwash.
And if it hasn't
happened to them.
They're being accurate
in telling their truth.
And perhaps they
went to art school.
Maybe they like to draw.
Maybe they like the
art game-- artwork
that's more looking into the
marketability of its itself
or how it can position
itself stylistically
within the season,
the art season.
These kinds of
intentions, you might say,
are not directed toward
bringing forth the sacred.
These similar kinds of
experiences of the higher
realms-- they basically are
seeing that which we think
of as our separate self
in an environment that is
surrounded by separate objects.
The Buddhas have a
beautiful word for it--
that there is no
independent arising,
that all is interdependent.
And one can't
separate themselves
from the whole of the cosmos.
So even though in our little ego
minds we walk around thinking,
I'm me, in my little
world, and everything else
is outside of it
and sort of is--
and you're trying to safeguard
yourself from everything.
In fact, you're one
with everything.
You couldn't be
here if you weren't.
And so it's really
just revealing a more
basic and primordial truth.
And we're able to
see not only are
we creatures of the physical
or mental dimensions,
but we're creatures of a
completely transcendental
dimension as well,
beyond all representation
and beyond birth and death.
These are the states that
are damn hard to depict
as an artist, but
are the essence
of the mystical experience,
the transcendence of space
and time, the ineffableness,
undescribableness of it--
a generally positive, kind
of, and blissful, but awesome,
the mysterium tremendum, as
Rudolf Otto, in the "Idea
of the Holy" talked about it.
He said, it's not just
flowers and birdsongs.
God is an earthquake, as well.
It's awesome.
It's terrifying.
It's-- you are one with the same
force that provides the spiral
arms of the galaxy, that
universal creativity
is also what you are as well.
And so when the mystic eye
is opened and sees that,
a person is forever changed.
Well, there are there certain
events that occur in one's
life that change everything.
I think falling in
love is one of them.
And for me, taking
psychedelics was a major thing
that changed everything.
It happens to be
that I fell in love
and took psychedelics
on the same night,
as I met my wife, really, under
my first experience of LSD.
And that was 26 years ago.
We're still together, still
ever more deeply in love.
And I think that LSD provided
a, like Aldous Huxley said, it
kind of cleansed my
doors of perception
so that I saw through the
nihilistic surface realm.
The material world became
transparent to a potently
meaningful and altogether
sacred understanding
of life-- something that I had
no way of preparing myself for.
For the couple of years
previous to my taking LSD,
which I took when
I was 21, I'd been
doing a number of
performance artworks
that had to do with polarities.
And I'd shaved
half of my hair off
and I'd gone to the
North Magnetic Pole.
I'd done a variety
of strange works that
had to do with
exploring dark side,
light side-- various kinds
of ideas of the rational,
the intuitive, hemispheres of
the brain, things like that.
And in the LSD experience,
I had closed my eyes
and I was in kind of
a spiralic tunnel.
And I was in the dark and
moving toward the light.
There was a kind of
a-- it was a Mother
of Pearl, kind of shimmery,
pearlescent, iridescent kind
of walls of this tunnel.
And I was in the dark.
And there was this kind
of curl of this tunnel.
And it was always
just around the edge
was where this was coming from.
And as it cast the light
on the walls of the tunnel,
I could see that,
from the very bright,
it went through all the
different shades of gray
into complete darkness.
And so this spiralic dynamic
tunnel of being in the dark
and moving toward the
light became a way for me
to integrate the opposites.
It was what I called
a polar unity spiral.
And suddenly, all the things
that seemed like in conflict
and opposition in
my sensibility found
a way of becoming each other.
And so it was an experience
of profound union inside.
And it pointed toward
a reality that I
barely could imagine existed.
And coupled as it was
with meeting Allison,
she was the only other person
at this party that was tripping.
It brought us together and I
called her up the next night
and said, you know,
uh, that was pretty
incredible what happened to me.
What happened to you?
And she said, well, oh,
I've done that many times.
And I said, well,
can we get together
and talk about it things?
And so she was happy
to get together.
And so we've been
together ever since.
And so it was a
catalyst in many ways.
It opened me up to
an understanding
that there's more to reality
than just the physical realm.
And it brought my
wife and I together.
So to me, it was very important.
Since that time, the numerous
times that we've done journeys
together, they've brought
forth significant visions
that-- I have to say,
this painting "Theologue,"
came directly out of
an LSD experience.
I was wearing a blindfold and
sitting in a Lotus position.
And I was looking
under the horizon.
And I could see this
electric perspective grid.
It was just, like,
going on forever.
But it also seemed
like, oddly enough,
I was projecting the
perspective grid.
And it was surrounding
me at the same time.
So it was an experience
of projecting and being
surrounded by your projection.
That is this odd quality
that the mind has.
When we dream, we
dream in this sort
of in imagined 3D
space-- or 4D space,
that we're walking through.
We find buildings
and things like that.
Somehow, in our minds,
we're able to create space.
And so this painting points
to this strange capacity
of perception to
be simultaneously
the cone of vision
and the vanishing
point of the composition.
"Theologue" is this
dialogue with God.
And it's got a long subtitle.
It's called "The Union of
Human and Divine Consciousness,
Weaving the Fabric
of Space and Time,
in Which the Self and its
Surroundings are Embedded."
So we're projecting the space
that we're surrounded by.
It's a very odd thing
that the mind does.
There's nowhere out there.
We're having this
experience in our minds.
Our minds are fabricating this
space that we're surrounded by.
Very curious.
And so that's what
this painting's about.
And it happens to be my
most popular painting.
We've sold thousands and
thousands of posters of this.
Numerous people
have come up to me
and said, man, I had an
experience that was like that.
I couldn't tell
anybody about it.
It was so weird.
You know?
But it was just like that!
And so now they have a thing.
They can say, I'm not insane.
He had it too.
And so numerous people
have come up to me
and told me about this.
So it's not alone.
It's just one
transpersonal experience
that bears relationship
with numerous other people's
transpersonal experiences.
And so tripping has-- it's, by
far, not the only way that I
get imagery to work with.
I mean, this "World
Soul" sculpture--
I was just waiting for a train,
basically the subway train.
And I was tired after
a day of teaching.
And poof, there on the subway
kind of just sidewalk area,
I saw this being that had
wings wrapped around it.
And it had multiple
eyes and things.
It obviously wasn't just
like the homeless guy
that was right next to it.
And so that was
totally on the natch.
But that psychedelics, I
think, have influenced or bent
my sensibility so that
it's sort of cracked open
the doors of perception,
or cleansed the lens
so that the membrane
between the visionary realm
and the physical
realm are a little--
that line is less hard.
You know?
Now it's a little
more permeable.
And so numerous paintings were
influenced by specific vision
states that were accessed
in theogenic voyages,
and numerous paintings
came out of just
a grace, just a vision that got
plopped into my consciousness.
I think there's a
strong relationship
between art and Shamanism.
The shamans job is
to journey inward
and to access sort
of the lower worlds
and the middle realms
and the upper worlds,
and these visionary
dimensions of reality.
They're going there
for the sake of healing
once they've become shamans.
They're not just
shamans in training.
But when they're working
for the good of the healing
of their community, or a
particular people who have
some kind of soul illness
or other kind of ailment,
in this way, maybe
it's stretching
it to say that the
artists, in general,
are oriented toward the
same kind of shamanic quest.
So I would say that at least
for a number of artists, they
Shamanic model, of the one that
journeys inward and then brings
out certain truths that maybe
provide some kind of healing
or meaningful understanding
for the community,
this is sort of a model of
a kind of sacred function
that a number of
artists can relate to.
And those in performance art
and other kinds of works where
they're looking specifically
into the visionary realms
and bringing out the numerous
kind of visionary art type
painters and things like that,
would feel very comfortable
in having adopted the model
of the shaman, I guess,
as an archetype for how to
view what they're doing.
If they're trying to
get out of the box
of contemporary
artist-- one that
is making art to fit in with
the trajectory of art history
as it's been explained
in the university
and in the arts school.
Most art schools don't
go into Shamanism 101,
or something like
that, or art schools.
They just don't deal with this--
how to access your unconscious
and bring it forward.
Now, meanwhile, they're
probably home getting high
and learning it for themselves.
But they don't have
the context, they
don't have the cultural
context in which
to view what they're doing
as some kind of sacred quest.
And numerous tribal, or in
theogenically based cultures,
they've got a way for
people to get into the job
of becoming a shaman.
And so it's why I stopped short
of calling artists shamans.
Because I have a great respect
for the shamanic profession.
It just can't be thrown
around willy nilly.
It's a very difficult and
arduous kind of thing.
It's like a real yogi
going into the cave
and meditating for a long time
and suffering their privations
and encountering their demons
and all of the rest of this.
It can bring people
close to physical death,
in some of these arduous vision
quests that they need to go on
and stuff.
So the Western art student who
gets out and paint pictures
and things like that and
calls himself a shaman,
I just-- that
doesn't ring right.
But if they are accessing
the visionary realm
and they're journeying and
are intending, at least,
to bring benefit
to their community
through their visions
and things like that,
I'd say that there's
a strong relationship
between the profession
of the shaman
and the profession
of the artist.
Now, there's numerous events,
like we've spoken of-- rock
shows, and things like that.
There's definitely different
kinds of events that
are more tribal than others.
And we can look at the
Burning Man festivals,
and at the rave and trance
party kind of situations,
where people will go.
They'll probably be in an
altered state of consciousness.
And their reality is
modeled by and influenced
by either the
music, the artwork,
the various kinds of
things that have been
provided in those environments.
And so they're making
environments to journey
in for fellow journeyers.
And so in situations like that,
and also in the sort of fever
pitch of certain rock
concerts, the ecstatic function
and the psychopomp
kind of function
of the shaman for
their culture--
that is to bring forth a
sacred understanding of reality
in the fever of the
crescendos of Jimi Hendrix,
or of Tool, or of various
kinds of amazing rock
and roll performers.
They elicit this intangible,
mysterious, sacred reality,
and in the same way that
perhaps dances around a fire,
or the taking of mushrooms
that was lorded over
by the curanderos, or the
different kind of shaman who
would administer
Ayahuasca to their group,
and things like that.
They're helping to control
an altered state of reality
by singing their icaros, their
songs of the soul that will
keep people centered toward
their healing reality
and toward their love
of life and healing,
and things like that.
And so there is a relationship
between what's going on
in these sort of tribal cultures
that are shamanically based
in their understanding
of sacred reality,
and the new kind of the
tribalism that has come forward
in the raves or the rock
shows, or Burning Man,
and various performance artists'
kinds of works and things
like that, and the kind
of nihilist sensibility
that emerges from a rational
point of view that has not
experienced the sacred, and
perhaps has been disappointed
in love, and perhaps has seen
the depth of cruelty and malice
that humanity can bring
forward onto the world,
onto each other.
Anybody who's deeply looked
into the trauma of human history
might sensibly become
a nihilist if they
had no idealism to guide them.
Because the catastrophe
that humanity
has wrought upon the web of
life in the 20th century--
industrial poisons and
various things that
have brought numerous
species to extinction,
and perhaps threatens our own.
It's a sensible
response to life.
And that's why I think a
lot of the punk rock bands
and various artists who are lost
in a dark, hellish, despairing
and traumatized space
are still making
the soul perceptible,
even though it's
a nihilist point of view.
It's true.
It has a truth to it,
and an emotional value
that is worthy of expression.
And it is a caustic
and destructive force
at the same time.
If we're only immersed in the
recognition of the foulness
and suffering of
life, we've only
grasped the first Noble Truth.
Life is suffering, or life is
perpetual unsatisfactoryness--
however you want to put it.
That's a fairly
nihilist statement.
But it was from the Buddha.
And so fortunately, there
were four Noble Truths.
And the whole sense of the
sort of nihilist point of view
only grasps hold
of the hell realms,
and doesn't bring us
forward into a way
that we can view our
lives as a journey.
In the nihilist point of
view, there's no exit,
and we're trapped in a
miserable hell realm.
And as I was saying, it
has a certain validity.
But at the same time, it's
a limited understanding
of what life can be-- valid,
important to recognize,
but important to
move from, as well.
In alchemy, they talk
about the putrescence
bringing regeneration.
And so this darkened cathonic
energy that comes forward
in nihilist works of various
kinds-- you can look at music,
you can look at painting, you
can look at cinema, wherever
you want to find
expressions of this kind
of darkened and
hopeless, flattened,
flat-land sensibility,
flat land in that
there's no depth in meaning,
no higher awareness of things.
It's all just the surface
of the material realm.
And the nihilist takes
the material world
as its only world,
it's only dimension.
And because therefore it's
collapsed any potential
for finding the sacred, since
it's always only surface,
then life becomes meaningless.
And this is a kind of a
trance as well that people
can get locked into.
I was locked into it for a
certain phase of my life.
Sometimes I just
love art in general--
just that there is
such a wonderful thing
that humans have always
done, as make art,
make music, make something.
Create.
I'm just so excited
that it exists at all.
It's just like falling
in love and finding
that there is actually
somebody in the world
who cares for you that much.
It's so exciting.
You know?
And that there's art
museums, and that there's
artists-- most of all, artists.
And it really is the individuals
that anymore draw me in.
I mean, Michelangelo is my
all time favorite artist.
One cannot rival him.
It's like the mountain
of Beethoven, you know?
You can go a certain
way up that mountain,
and maybe you've traversed
a little bit of it.
But, you know, it's
an unscalable mount.
It's like the Mount
Everest of art.
Michelangelo was an architect,
the most divine draftsman.
He was a painter extraordinaire
and an unbelievable sculptor.
He wrote sonnets.
He was this kind of
Renaissance human being
that encompassed his culture
and brought it forward.
He embodied it and pointed
in a new direction.
And as his last pieta would
have done Brancusi proud.
It was a work of a
modernist sensibility.
I mean, here is a gothic
character who was deeply
immersed in his Catholicism,
And then started
to hear the Neoplatonic
points of view
about the soul and its ability
to be expressed through art,
and the immortality
of the soul, and how
different various
religions were carrying
some of the same truths.
Some of the Neoplatonists
were espousing
such dangerous
heresies at that time
that all religions were
one, and things like that,
and that God was
directly perceptible.
One didn't have to go
through an intermediary,
like a priest, and
things like that.
So the understanding that there
was a mystical reality that you
could directly apprehend was
at the basis of Michelangelo's
profound works.
It was coming through a
Christian sensibility.
So "The Last Judgment"
features Christ in the center
of the mandala, in a
swirl, a cascade of flesh
that Christ was mirroring
in his position, like this.
It was like he was
a Daoist master.
And some have
interpreted his gaze
as the wrathful Lord making
this judgment call on the souls.
But I've always felt if you look
at his face, it's very benign.
It's not wrathful in the least.
It's compassionate.
It's sympathetic.
And it's basically saying,
some are a-coming up,
and some are a-going down.
You know?
And it's just kind of a swirl.
Heaven and hell.
To me, this is every minute/
every moment of our life
is this cosmic swirl.
My favorite artists
from every culture
are the ones who brought
forth meaning and symbolism
and mind-blowing
expansive, infinite nature
of spiritual reality.
And we can find it
in the sacred art
of all the different cultures.
When we look at the Hindu
philosophical portraits
and things like that--
I mean, I always
love seeing the portraits
of Krishna displaying
his cosmic form, with
all the multiple heads
and eyes and limbs and things.
These attempts to depict
the transcendental mystical
visionary experience
are the types of artwork
that really excite me.
And you can find them in the
Buddhist Thangka paintings,
where the different dieties
or the mandalas are formed,
or the wrathful forms, or the
beatific and peaceful Buddhas
are there.
Any artwork that's pointing at
this sort of visionary realm
are some of my favorite,
favorite works of art.
Many of these artists
are anonymous.
Any artwork-- and most
times it's sacred art that's
trying to depict this
reality, are things that I've
always become more drawn to.
The symbolist painters
of the 19th century--
there's an artist
named Jean Delville.
And he was called a
painter of astral forms.
And he also was
influenced by Theosophy.
And as an artist whose work
I feel strongly related to,
he had a specific kind
of mystical understanding
of reality.
And it came forward
in his artwork.
So Jean Delville has
been a particularly
influential painter to me.
And he's one of my
favorite painters, as well.
He's in, some ways,
regarded as, I guess,
a grade B painter-- I
don't know-- by some.
But to me, he's quite
a beautiful, amazing
symbolist painter
who brought forward
many of the understandings
of Theosophy in his artwork.
And he painted very
spiritual beings
but that were not aligned
to a specific sacred art
tradition, which is really
what I'm trying to do, as well.
Likewise, there was a
painter in the 20th century
named Pavel Tchelitchew.
And he was a painter
born in Russia,
and came to Paris when the
Russian Revolution occurred.
And his family, which
was of a noble birth,
kind of became deposed.
They fled to the
hinterlands, and he
fled to Paris because he
wanted to become a young up
and coming artist.
He met Picasso and Braque
and all of the rest
of the bohemian scene, there.
And he was kind of
adopted by Gertrude
Stein and Alice Toklas, and
some of those characters there.
And his most famous work
is "Hide and Seek," which
is in the Museum of Modern Art.
And it's quite an
extraordinary painting.
It looks like both
a hand and a foot.
And it's really like a tree.
And he was immersed in
occultism and alchemy.
And he brought forward these
references quite intentionally
in his painting.
And in this way, he was a very
unusual painter of his time.
In the '30s and '40s and
'50s, very few people
were taking reference
points from alchemy, say.
And the occult was
not really where
many artists were working.
He also devised a kind
of-- and I've never
been able to find out
what was the direct cause
of this influence.
But he had a kind
of x-ray vision
that he was bringing forward
in his artwork that is very
related to what I am doing.
And I think it was for
many of the same reasons.
He was piercing the veil of
material reality-- trying
to show the living life that
was going on inside of people
rather than strictly
focus on surfaces.
And so these were the same
inspirations that brought me
to this kind of
spiritualized anatomy,
which I'd started to do before
really becoming familiar
with Tchelitchew's work.
But then I felt like,
my god, he's done it
all-- when I had seen his work.
Fortunately, he
hadn't done it all.
But I would say that he's a very
strong influence on my work,
and the artists whose work my
work could most be, I think,
related to in the canon
of 20th century painters.
And so in my painting called
"Painting," which just shows
a painter painting,
we have various kinds
of artists in the
peanut gallery there
that are influencing the
painter as they're painting.
And Delville is one of them,
and Tchelitchew is one of them.
William Blake is
a big one for me,
because he was this independent
sensibility who, although he
was influenced by
Christianity, his spirituality
was quite idiosyncratic.
And he went it alone.
He did not kowtow to any kind
of artistic establishment,
and died a pauper, and is
celebrated with exhibits
at the Tate and the
Metropolitan, now,
and is beloved by
millions of people.
But he suffered for
his genius, I think,
and his unyielding
kind of character.
And so he's also a great
archetype and an influence.
He loved Michelangelo.
I think Michelangelo,
to him, was
his favorite artist, as well.
So Michelangelo is also in the
peanut gallery of the painter's
painting anyway.
As well as Frida
Kahlo, who-- she's
one of my favorite
artists, as well.
Here is somebody who was
a troubled personality,
but whose emotions
came through very
strongly in her self-portraits.
And those, I think,
especially-- anyone
can see this wounded deer.
It's basically a
human animal hybrid
that's pierced by arrows.
It's got the face of Frida,
but the body of a deer.
And she was
intensely vulnerable.
And she made her vulnerability
and depth of her emotions
visible through
her self-portraits.
The great self-portrait
painters like Rembrandt,
who's also one in the peanut
gallery of this painting,
"Painting."
Here was a person who
could paint a human soul.
There was something
unbelievable about his ability
to render flesh.
It looked like it was
breathing and palpable.
The delicacy and the nuances
that you associate, say,
with your grandmother's
hanging flesh-- Rembrandt
could make it look real.
And he had a very mysterious way
of drawing us into the works.
And for me, some of
his most powerful works
are his self-portraits.
And those are ones that just--
you can peer right into him,
and it's as though he's
standing before you.
You can become the artist just
by losing yourself in the work.
And van Gogh was the same way.
Frida Kahlo was the same way.
They each made
these self-portraits
that showed the depth of
their search for who they were
and what they were, and brings
us right into that longing
and search when we
look into their soul
through looking into their
eyes of their self-portraiture.
So those are amazing
artists to me.
Hieronymus Bosch.
He's sort of the
last one that was
in this painting of painting.
And he is kind of like the
granddaddy of visionary art.
His works are astonishing.
They're so jewel-like.
And so the architecture
that he put
in "The Garden of
Earthly Delights"
is still beyond
even Frank Gehry.
And nobody has done this
kind of weird fruit-animal
hybrid architecture yet.
Not even the most
bizarre architects
have come up with these similar
kind of jewel-like mindscapes
that Bosch was dealing in.
He portrayed the heavens
and hells and the souls
ascending to the hereafter.
And he covered the gamut.
And he had an imagination
was unparalleled.
So all of those artists, I bow
in gratitude and recognition
of their supreme contribution to
the enjoyment and the deepening
and enrichment of humanity.
A sacred space is a place of
initiation into sacred reality.
These ideas about
sacred reality change
from culture to culture a bit.
And we find temples and
chapels and various pagodas
and mandala sort of
forms, and the stupas,
and various other kinds
of religious architecture
throughout world culture.
We see the Great Pyramids
all of the various kinds
of sacred architecture.
I believe that these
sacred spaces of initiation
are specific to each
of these cultures,
and key one into the
understand of the spirit
that these cultures represented.
Now, in the 21 century,
and the third millennium,
with a more global sensibility,
and emerging what I think
of as world spirit, we have
an opportunity to create
a kind of universal sacred art.
And it may seem a naive or
an idealistic kind of goal.
But informed by all
world sacred art
and also the individual's
own experience
of these mystical realms,
I believe it's possible
that we can make various
kinds of sacred spaces
that are not confined to
one religion or another,
but speak to a more universal
spirituality for humanity.
And I would like to create
the Chapel of Sacred Mirrors.
A sacred mirror is something
that I wouldn't just reflect
your physical presence,
but would reflect
your soul, as well,
or whatever you
take to be your sacred element.
In this chapel, we
have the sacred mirrors
that go through to the
physical, tangible material
realm, the body and all
its anatomical features,
the nervous system,
cardiovascular system,
skeleton, all the things that
make up our physical body.
And then the
socio-political realm
of the individual, where we
have specific races and genders
and things like that.
You put skin on a person,
and they're an individual.
Can we relate to and see
through the surfaces of the skin
to see how each individual
is a mirror of ourselves?
This is part of the question,
and part of why these are set
up in this kind of sequence.
You look through the body.
And then you look through
your socio-political identity.
And then it moves on to
the spiritual reality,
or the archetypes of the
energies that surround us
and that move through us,
and the specific religious
archetypes the influence us.
These are elements
of our identity
just as our physical body is.
And so to take the body and
mind and spirit of an individual
and go through that
sort of sequence,
that's one aspect
of this chapel.
Those are the Sacred
Mirror Series.
Then there's the Progress
of the Soul paintings, that
go from an individual who's
praying to the act of finding
a loved one, "The Beloved,"
and kissing, and lovemaking,
and pregnancy, and birth, and
all the sequence in the journey
of life-- bringing out
images like nursing
and the different kind
of inter-relationship
with the family, and
mostly emphasizing
the connection of love.
And this, to me, is what
makes life worthwhile.
And I want the chapel to
point to and underscore that
which makes life worth living.
And it will also have what I
call the World Prayer Wheel,
that will be a stained glass
globe, a geodesic sphere,
of the earth that is
supported by prayers
from all different
world spiritual paths.
And that by turning it, one
can sort of turn the world.
So it's basically
sacred architecture
that's about beings inside
of beings inside of beings.
And the individual is
situated inside of shells
of greater and greater being.
And so what will happen when the
person turns the World Prayer
Wheel-- they become more
world-centric in their
identity, after they've gone
through this sort of body,
mind, spirit.
Then they enter
into the collective
and see how we're all important
in making the world go around,
and that we're also part of
one greater cosmic being.